.TH IOMELT 1 "APRIL 2026" "Version 1.2" "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
iomelt - a simple yet effective IO benchmark tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B iomelt
[\fB-dDfhHnoOrRvV\fR]
[\fB-b\fR \fIBYTES\fR]
[\fB-s\fR \fIBYTES\fR]
[\fB-p\fR \fIPATH\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B iomelt
is a benchmark tool for storage devices.
It is designed to be simple to use and to produce
consistent and reproducible results. By default it
creates a 10 megabyte file using the optimal block
size as returned by
.BR statvfs (3)
and runs a series of five tests: serial write, serial read,
random rewrite, random read, and mixed read/write.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fB-b\fR\ \fIBYTES\fR
Block size used for read and write operations.
Unless specified, iomelt will use the optimal block size
as returned by
.BR statvfs (3).
Block size
.B must
be a power of two.
K, M, and G suffixes may be used for Kilobytes, Megabytes,
and Gigabytes, respectively.
.IP \fB-d\fR
Dump data in a format that can be easily digested by
pattern processing commands like
.BR awk (1).
Output fields are separated by semicolons:
Date, Hostname, Test, File Size, Block Size, Total Time,
Calls per second, Bytes per second.
.IP \fB-D\fR
Print the timestamp as seconds since the Unix epoch instead of
a human-readable date string.
.IP \fB-f\fR
Disable
.BR posix_fadvise (2)
cache hints. By default, iomelt advises the kernel to drop
cached data between tests to reduce buffer cache interference.
This option disables that behaviour. Linux only.
.IP \fB-h\fR
Print usage information and exit.
.IP \fB-k\fR
Keep the workload file on exit instead of removing it.
Useful for inspecting the file after a run or for pre-seeding
subsequent runs on the same path.
.IP \fB-H\fR
Omit the header row when dumping data with
.BR -d .
.IP \fB-n\fR
Do not convert byte counts to a human-readable format;
print raw values instead.
.IP \fB-o\fR
Suppress normal result output. Does not suppress the output
produced by
.BR -d .
.IP \fB-O\fR
Reopen the workload file before each test.
.IP \fB-p\fR\ \fIPATH\fR
Path to the directory where the test file should be created.
.IP \fB-r\fR
Append a random suffix to the test file name. Useful when
testing clustered or distributed file systems that use the
file name as a hash key.
.IP \fB-R\fR
Disable Direct IO. By default, iomelt enables Direct IO to bypass
the page cache and measure true device-level performance. The
underlying file system
.B must
support the
.B O_DIRECT
flag, and the I/O buffer is allocated with
.BR posix_memalign (3)
to satisfy alignment requirements.
On macOS,
.B F_NOCACHE
is used instead.
Use this flag to fall back to buffered IO, for example on file systems
that do not support
.BR O_DIRECT .
.IP \fB-w\fR\ \fIFILE\fR
Append CSV output to
.I FILE
instead of writing it to standard output.
Implies
.BR -d .
If
.I FILE
already exists and contains data the header row is suppressed automatically,
making it safe to call from a cron job without
.BR -H .
If
.I FILE
cannot be opened for writing iomelt logs an error and exits.
.IP \fB-s\fR\ \fIBYTES\fR
Test file size. Default is 10 megabytes.
K, M, and G suffixes may be used for Kilobytes, Megabytes,
and Gigabytes, respectively.
The file size must be greater than the block size.
.IP \fB-v\fR
Increase verbosity. May be specified multiple times
(e.g.\&
.BR -vvv )
for progressively more output.
.IP \fB-V\fR
Print the version number and exit.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.B iomelt
exits 0 on success and non-zero if an error occurs.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Rodrigo Campos (camposr@gmail.com)
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR open (2),
.BR read (2),
.BR write (2),
.BR lseek (2),
.BR posix_fadvise (2),
.BR statvfs (3),
.BR posix_memalign (3)
.SH BUGS
The
.B -v
option must precede the
.B -p
option on the command line in order for the verbosity setting
to take effect during the
.BR chdir (2)
operation.
